===========================================================================
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
|  READ THIS FILE ALL THE WAY THROUGH BEFORE ATTEMPTING TO INSTALL FROTZ  |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
===========================================================================

Frotz was originally written specifically for MS/PC DOS.  When it began 
to be ported to other machines and operating systems, the DOS port 
lagged behind.  This has been fixed to the extent that DOS is capable of 
the new enhancements.  For instance, DOS Frotz is now capable of using 
Blorb files to get audio and graphical data.  The old Infocom-style 
mechanism of doing this has been removed.  Sound is supported through 
Soundblaster compatible sound cards.  Graphic levels from Hercules to 
MCGA are supported.

To compile DOS Frotz, you need the following:
	* Borland Turbo C++ 3.00.  This is the latest version I'm aware 
	  of capable of building 16-bit DOS applications.
	* PC-DOS, MS-DOS, or DR-DOS version 5.0 or higher.
	  FreeDOS works well too.


==============
Compilation ||
==============

Turbo C++ is typically installed to C:\tc.  Make sure your path contains 
C:\tc\bin.  When this is done, type "make".  Did Borland's make program 
run?  Now type "tcc".  If those two commands work, then you should be 
ready to compile.

To compile, you need to first get the source code into a DOS machine,
whether it's real or emulated.  Do "make dos" to produce a zip file,
frotzsrc.zip, which can then be copied to your real or virtual DOS
machine.

To compile, open up this zip file and go into the frotzsrc directory and
type "build".  That will invoke "build.bat", a batch file that simply
executes "make -f makefile.tc".  The reason for this is a bit of
syntactic sugar to deal with the fact that it is impractical to have one
Makefile build both Unix and DOS versions.  After about a minute, you
should have FROTZ.EXE.  This file is all you need to run Frotz.  Put it
somewhere in your path and go to wherever you keep your Infocom games.
Type "frotz zork1.dat" or whatever and there you go.

If you want to disable Blorb file support and/or sound support, first
open Makefile.tc in a text editor and scroll down to the section where
you see "Compile-time options".  There comment out the define for
"SOUND_SUPPORT" to disable compilation of sound support.  To disable
Blorb file support, uncomment the define for "NO_BLORB".  Then do "build
clean" and then "build".


========================
Hardware Requirements ||
========================

The exact hardware requirements of DOS Frotz are yet to be determined.  
Please send me reports of what Zcode works and what doesn't.
