.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH FROTZ "6" "2021-06-21" "Frotz v2.54"
.SH NAME
frotz \- interpreter for Infocom and other Z-Machine games

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B frotz
.RI [ options "] " "file " [ blorb_file "]"
.P
At least one file must be specified on the command line.  This can be
either a plain Z-code file or a Blorb file.  A Z-code file is a compiled
executable for the Z-Machine.  A Blorb file contains audio, graphics,
and other things in addition to the game wrapped up into a single file.
It can also optionally contain the Z-Machine executable.  If a plain
Z-code file is supplied, then
.B Frotz
will check for a Blorb file with the same base name but an extension of
.B .blb, .blorb,
or
.B .zblorb
and load it if found.
.P
If the file supplied on the command line is a Blorb file, then
.B Frotz
will check to see if a Z-code file is contained within.  If not found, then
.B Frotz
will complain and exit.
.P
An alternatively-named Blorb file can be supplied as the optional second
parameter to the command line invocation.

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Frotz
is a Z-Machine interpreter.  The Z-machine is a virtual machine designed
by Infocom to run all of their text adventures.  It went through multiple
revisions during the lifetime of the company, and two further revisions
(V7 and V8) were created by Graham Nelson after the company's demise.
The specification is now quite well documented; this version of Frotz
supports version 1.1.  See
.B Z-MACHINE STANDARDS
below.
.P
This version of Frotz fully supports all these versions of the Z-Machine
except for version 6.  Version 6 is semi-supported by displaying the
outlines of V6 graphics with the picture number in the bottom-right
corner.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Watch attribute setting.  Setting and clearing of attributes on objects
will be noted in debugging messages.
.TP
.B \-A
Watch attribute testing.  Every time the Z-machine tests an attribute
value, the test and the result will be reported.
.TP
.B \-b <colorname>
Sets the default background color.  <colorname> corresponds to one of the
Z-machine colors, which are as follows:
.br
.I \ \ \ \ black red green yellow blue magenta cyan white
.br
If color support is disabled or not available on your terminal, this
option does nothing.
.TP
.B \-c N
Sets the number of context lines used.  By default, after a
.RB ''[MORE]''
prompt, and assuming there is enough output pending, Frotz will allow all
the currently visible lines to scroll off the screen before prompting
again.  This switch specifies how many lines of text Frotz will hold
over and display at the top of the next screen.
.TP
.B \-d
Disable color.
.TP
.B \-e
Enable sound.  If you've disabled sound in a config file and want to hear
sound effects, use this.
.TP
.B \-E <mode>
Emphasis mode.
.B <mode>
corresponds to one of three possible ways to render emphasized text.
Possible choices are as follows:
.br
.I \ \ \ \ italic underline none
.br
Infocom created an EMPHASIS_STYLE for the Z-machine, which was supposed
to make the text be underlined or be italicized. Exactly what to do is
left up to the interpreter.  Some platforms/terminals could support
either, both of these, or neither.  Underlining was more common than
italic. This option allows you to choose how EMPHASIS_STYLE is
displayed.
.TP
.B \-f <colorname>
Sets the default foreground color.  <colorname> corresponds to one of the
Z-machine colors, which are as follows:
.br
.I \ \ \ \ black red green yellow blue magenta cyan white
.br
If color support is disabled or is not available on your terminal, this
option does nothing.
.TP
.B \-F
Force color mode.  If you've disabled color in a config file and want to
Frotz to display colors, use this.
.TP
.B \-h N
Manually sets the text height.  Though most curses libraries are intelligent
enough to determine the current width from the terminal, it may sometimes
be necessary to use this option to override the default.
.TP
.B \-i
Ignore fatal errors.  If a Z-Machine interpreter encounters a zcode error
such as division-by-zero or addressing an illegal object, the proper
response is to abort execution.  This is done because the zcode program
doesn't have a clear idea of what is going on.  There are some games out
there that cause fatal errors because the authors were careless and used
an interpreter that didn't properly check for errors.  This option is
intended to get around such bugs, but be warned that Strange Things may
happen if fatal errors are not caught.
.TP
.B \-I N
Set the interpreter number.  Infocom designed the Z-machine such that a
game could tell on what kind of machine the interpreter was running.
See
.B INTERPRETER NUMBER
below.
.TP
.B \-l N
Sets the left margin, for those who might have specific formatting needs.
.TP
.B \-L <filename>
When the game starts, load this saved game file.
.TP
.B \-m
Enable mouse support.  Naturally, this is quite limited, but it's
available for anyone who wants to experiment with it. When active, the
mouse cannot be used to copy text from the terminal.
.TP
.B \-o
Watch object movement.  This option enables debugging messages from the
interpreter which describe the moving of objects in the object tree.
.TP
.B \-O
Watch object location.  These debugging messages detail the locations of
objects in the object tree.
.TP
.B \-p
Plain ASCII output only.  This inhibits the output of accented letters
and other characters from the Latin-1 character set, replacing them with
reasonable alternatives.  This may be necessary on devices lacking these
characters.  The OE/oe dipthongs are missing from the Latin-1 set.
These are handled as well.
.TP
.B \-P
Alter the
.I @piracy
opcode.  The
.I @piracy
opcode was never used by Infocom. This switch is really only useful for
those who like to toy around with Z-code.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet.  Turns off sound effects.  Useful when running Frotz on a remote
machine and you don't want to bother whoever's near the console with weird
noises.
.TP
.B \-r N
Sets the right margin.
.TP
.B \-R <path>
Restricted read/write.  Reading and writing files will be restricted
only to the provided path. Ordinarily Frotz will write or read its
saves, transcripts, and move recordings in whatever path or directory
the user provides when the
.B SAVE,
.B SCRIPT,
or
.B RECORDING
commands are given.  This can be undesirable if Frotz is run in a
restricted environment, by a front end, or by a chatbot.  This option will
cause Frotz to write or read only to the provided path and nowhere else.
Then the controlling process can then watch that directory for changes
and need not worry about someone scribbling or snooping who-knows-where.
.TP
.B \-s N
Set the random number seed value.  The given seed value is used as the
initial seed value on every restart. By default, the random number
generator is initialized based on the system clock; this allows you to
make the random number generator predictable, for use in recorded
scripts or debugging.  For instance,
.B Curses
makes random decisions before the first input (such that the hot key
Alt\-S does not really help).
.TP
.B \-t
Sets the Z-machine's
.I Tandy bit,
which may affect the behavior of certain Infocom games.  For example,
Zork I pretends not to have sequels, and Witness has its language
toned down.
.TP
.B \-u N
Sets the number of slots available for Frotz's multiple undo hotkey (see
below).  This defaults to 25, which should be sufficient for most
purposes.  Setting too high a number here may be dangerous on machines
with limited memory.
.TP
.B \-w N
Manually sets the text width.
.TP
.B \-x
Expand the abbreviations "g", "x", and "z" to "again", "examine", and
"wait".  This switch is for use with old Infocom games that lack these
common abbreviations which were introduced in later games.  Use it with
caution: A few games might use "g", "x" or "z" for different purposes.
.TP
.B \-v
Show version information and exit.  This will display the version of
Frotz, some information about what's enabled and what's not, the commit
date of the source code, and a
.BR git (1)
hash of that commit.
.TP
.B \-Z N
Error checking mode.
.br
    0 = don't report errors.
.br
    1 = report first instance of an error.
.br
    2 = report all errors.
.br
    3 = exit after any error.
.br
Default is 1 (report first instance of an error).

.SH HOT KEYS
These hot keys are enabled only when the Z-machine is waiting for line
input (for Z-machine experts: the
.I @read
opcode).
.IP
.B Alt-D
Set debugging options.
.br
.B Alt-H
Help (print the list of hot keys).
.br
.B Alt-N
New game (restart).
.br
.B Alt-P
Playback on.
.br
.B Alt-R
Recording on/off.
.br
.B Alt-S
Set random number seed.
.br
.B Alt-U
Undo one turn.
.br
.B Alt-X
Exit game (after confirmation).

.SH INTERPRETER NUMBER
The interpreter number is a setting in the Z-machine header which is
used to tell the game on what sort of machine the interpreter is
running.
.B Frotz
will automatically choose the most appropriate number for a given
Infocom-produced game.  Should you want to override the number, the
.B \-I
option is available.
.P
An interpreter should choose the interpreter number most suitable for
the machine it will run on.  In Versions up to 5, the main consideration
is that the behaviour of 'Beyond Zork' depends on the interpreter
number (in terms of its usage of the character graphics font). In
Version 6, the decision is more serious, as existing Infocom story files
depend on interpreter number in many ways: moreover, some story files
expect to be run only on the interpreters for a particular machine.
There are, for instance, specifically Amiga versions.  The DECSystem-20
was Infocom's own in-house mainframe.
.P
For Infocom's four V6 games, the interpreter number will be
automatically chosen based on the title and release number.  Of course,
this can be overridden at the command line.
.P
Infocom used the following interpreter numbers:
.IP
.B 1 \ DECSystem\ 20
.br
.B 2 \ Apple\ IIe
.br
.B 3 \ Macintosh
.br
.B 4 \ Amiga
.br
.B 5 \ Atari\ ST
.br
.B 6 \ IBM\ PC
.br
.B 7 \ Commodore 128
.br
.B 8 \ Commodore 64
.br
.B 9 \ Apple\ IIc
.br
.B 10 Apple\ IIgs
.br
.B 11 Tandy\ Color

.SH CONFIGURATION FILES
On startup,
.B frotz
will first check the system's frotz.conf then $HOME/.frotzrc for
configuration information.  The configuration file uses a simple syntax
of
.IP
.B <variable> <whitespace> <value>
.PP
Color names may be any of the following:
.IP
.BR black\ |\ red\ |\ green\ |\ blue\ |\ magenta\ |\ cyan\ |\ white
.PP
.B ascii
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Use plain ASCII only.  Default is "off".
.PP
.B background
\ \ <colorname>
.br
Set background color.  Default is terminal's default background color.
.PP
.B color
\ \ yes\ |\ no
.br
Use color text.  Default is "yes" if supported.
.PP
.B errormode
\ \ never\ |\ once\ |\ always\ |\ fatal
.br
Set error reporting mode.
.IP
.I never
Don't report any errors except for fatal ones.
.br
.I once
Report only the first instance of an error.
.br
.I always
Report every instance of an error.
.br
.I fatal
Abort on any error, even non-fatal ones.
.br
Default is "once".
.PP
.B expand_abb
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Expand abbreviations.  Default is off.  Expand the abbreviations "g", "x",
and "z" to "again", "examine", and "wait".  This switch is for use with
old Infocom games that lack these common abbreviations which were
introduced in later games.  Use it with caution.  A few games might use
the "g", "x", or "z" for different purposes.
.PP
.B foreground
\ \ <colorname>
.br
Set foreground color.  Default is terminal's default foreground color.
.PP
.B ignore_fatal
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Ignore fatal errors.  If a Z-Machine interpreter encounters a zcode error
such as division-by-zero or addressing an illegal object, the proper
response is to abort execution.  This is done because the zcode program
doesn't have a clear idea of what is going on.  There are some games out
there that cause fatal errors because the authors were careless and used
an interpreter that didn't properly check for errors.  This option is
intended to get around such bugs, but be warned that Strange Things may
happen if fatal errors are not caught.
.br
Default is "off"
.PP
.B piracy
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Alter the piracy opcode.  Default is off.  The piracy opcode was never
used by Infocom. This option is only useful for those who like to toy
around with Z-code.
.PP
.B randseed
\ \ <integer>
.br
Set random number seed.  Default comes from the Unix epoch.
.PP
.B sound
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Turn sound effects on or off.  Default is "on".
.PP
.BR tandy
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Set the machine's
.I Tandy bit.
This may affect the behavior of certain Infocom games.  For example, Zork
I pretends not to have sequels, and Witness has its language toned down.
Default is "off".
.PP
.B undo_slots
\ \ <integer>
.br
Set number of undo slots.  Default is 500.
.PP
.B zcode_path
\ \ /path/to/zcode/files:/another/path
.br
Set path to search for zcode game files.  This is just like the $PATH
environmental variable except that you can't put environmental variables
in the path or use other shortcuts.  For example, "$HOME/games/zcode" is
illegal because the shell can't interpret that
.B $HOME
variable.
.P
.B The following options are really only useful for weird terminals, weird curses libraries or if you want to force a certain look (like play in 40-column mode).
.PP
.B context_lines
\ \ <integer>
.br
Set the number of context lines used.  By default, after a ``[MORE]''
prompt, and assuming there is enough output pending, frotz will allow all
the currently visible lines to scroll off the screen before prompting
again.  This switch specifies how many lines of text frotz will hold over
and display at the top of the next screen.  Default is "0".
.PP
.B left_margin
\ \ <integer>
.br
Set the left margin.  This is for those who might have special formatting
needs.
.PP
.B right_margin
\ \ <integer>
.br
Set the right margin.  This is for those who might have special formatting
needs.
.PP
.B text_height
\ \ <integer>
.br
Manually set text height.  Most curses libraries are intelligent enough
to determine the current width of the terminal.  You may need to use this
option to override the default.
.PP
.B text_width
\ \ <integer>
.br
Manually set text width.  Again, this should not be necessary except in
special circumstances.
.PP
.B script_width
\ \ <integer>
.br
Set the transcript width.  Default is 80 columns per line, regardless of
the current text width.  This switch allows you to change this setting.
You may set this to "0" to deactivate automatic line-splitting in
transcript files.
.P
.B The following options are mainly useful for debugging or cheating.
.PP
.B attrib_set
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Watch attribute setting.  Setting and clearing of attributes on objects
will be noted in debugging messages.  Default is "off"
.PP
.B attrib_test
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Watch attribute testing.  Every time the Z-machine tests an attribute
value, the test and the result will be reported.  Default is "off".
.PP
.B obj_loc
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Watch object location.  These debugging messages detail the locations of
objects in the object tree.  Default is "off".
.PP
.B obj_move
\ \ on\ |\ off
.br
Watch object movement.  This option enables debugging messages from the
interpreter which describe the movement of objects in the object tree.
Default is "off".

.SH COLOR
Whether or not
.B Frotz
will display color depends upon the curses library and the terminal.  In
general, an xterm or other X11-based terminal emulator will support
color.  Sometimes the value of $TERM will need to be set to something
like "xterm-color" or "rxvt-256color".  For a Linux console,
.B $TERM
is almost always set to "linux".  This will support color.  For a NetBSD
or OpenBSD console on an x86 or amd64, the default value of
.B $TERM
is "vt100".  To get color supported there, you need to set $TERM to
"pc3". A FreeBSD console's
.B $TERM
is "xterm" and will support color.  Color on text consoles on machines
other than x86 or amd64 is untested.

On some operating systems, Xterm will not change the cursor color to
match that of the text.  To fix this, add the following line to your
.B .Xresources
file and type
.B xrdb -merge $HOME/.Xresources
.IP
xterm*cursorColor:      *XtDefaultForeground
.P
This can also be added to a systemwide file such as
.B /etc/X11/Xresources/x11-common
or
.B /etc/X11/app-defaults/XTerm.
The names and locations of the system-wide files can vary from OS to OS.

.SH UNICODE
.B Frotz
supports Unicode glyphs by way of UTF-8 if the terminal used supports
UTF-8.  If you prefer using
.BR xterm ,
start it as
.B uxterm .
This is a wrapper script that sets up xterm with UTF-8 locale.  You can
also manually tell an
.B xterm
to switch into UTF-8 mode by holding CTRL and the right mouse button to
bring up the VT FONTS menu.  Depending on how
.B xterm
was installed, you may see an option for "UTF-8 Fonts" which will
allow Unicode to be properly displayed.
.P
Getting normal xterm to behave like this all the time can vary from
system to system.  Other terminal emulators have their own ways of being
set to use UTF-8 character encoding.

.SH NON ASCII CHARACTERS
Non-ASCII glyphs can be displayed without the use of UTF-8 by way of the
ISO-8859-1 or ISO-8859-15 (Latin-1 or Latin-9) character sets.
ISO-8859-15 is more or less identical to ISO-8859-1 except that the
OE/oe dipthongs are supported, replacing the seldom-used 1/2 and 1/4
glyphs.  See also
.B luit(1)
.B charsets(7)
.B iso_8859-1(7)
and
.B iso_8859-15(7)
for more information.

.SH LOCALE
An important means of ensuring the system knows to use UTF-8 is to make
sure the locale is set appropriately.  This is valid only when
.B Dumb Frotz
runs under Unix-ish systems.
.P
Using the command
.B "locale"
will tell you what is currently in use.  Using
.B "locale -a
will show you what's available.  Then set your LANG evironmental
variable to something appropriate by using one of these commands:
.IP
export LANG=C.UTF-8
export LANG=en_US.utf8
.P
This can be put in your shell configuration file, be it
.B .profile,
.B .bash_profile,
.B .login,
.B .bashrc,
or whatever.
.P
It can also be set system-wide in the equivalent files in
.B /etc.

.SH Z-MACHINE STANDARDS
.B Frotz
complies with the Z-Machine Standard 1.1 of May 2006, revised February
2014.  The authoritative version is found here:
.br
http://inform-fiction.org/zmachine/standards/z1point1/index.html
.P
As of 1.1, an additional optional
.B prompt
parameter is allowed on Version 5 extended save/restore.  This parameter
allows a game to read or write an auxiliary (aux) file without prompting
the player.  See section 15 of the Standard for details.
.B Frotz
restricts such files to having an ".aux" filename extension.  When the
.B -R
(restricted read/write) option is active, reads and writes through this
mechanism are restricted to the provided path the same as all other file
accesses.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
If the
.B ZCODE_PATH
environmental variable is defined, frotz will search that path for game
files.  If that doesn't exist,
.B INFOCOM_PATH
will be searched.  Any additional files required, such as auxilary, or
blorb files must be in the same directory as
.B frotz
finds the story file.
.P
For the Alt key to be read correctly in an Xterm, the following lines
should be in your .Xresources file:
.IP
XTerm*metaSendsEscape: true
.br
XTerm*eightBitInput: false

.SH FURTHER INFORMATION
.PP
The
.B Frotz
homepage is at
.B https://661.org/proj/if/frotz/.
.PP
A
.BR git (1)
repository of all versions of Unix Frotz back to 2.32 to the bleeding
edge is available for public perusal at
.br
.B https://gitlab.com/DavidGriffith/frotz/.
.PP
The Interactive Fiction Archive, at
.BR https://www.ifarchive.org/ ,
is a good place to find games to play with Frotz.  Various ports and
builds for Frotz may also be found there.
.PP
Most distributions of Linux and BSD include
.B Frotz
in their package repositories.
.PP
It is distributed under the GNU General Public License version 2 or (at
your option) any later version.  It may be viewed at
.br
.BR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html
.PP
This software is offered as-is with no warranty or liability.  If you
find a bug or would like
.B Frotz
to do something it doesn't currently do, please visit the above Gitlab
website and report your concerns.

.SH CAVEATS
The Z Machine itself has trouble with the concept of resizing a terminal.
It assumes that once the text height and width are set, they will never
change; even across saves.  This made sense when 24x80 terminals were the
norm and graphical user interfaces were mostly unknown.  I'm fairly sure
there's a way around this problem, but for now, don't resize an xterm in
which frotz is running.  Also, you should try to make sure the terminal
on which you restore a saved game has the same dimensions as the one on
which you saved the game.
.P
Audio latency might be unreasonably long depending on the settings of
your operating system.  Linux generally has things right.  The BSDs may
need some
.BR sysctl (8)
settings adjusted.  See the
.BR sound (4)
or
.BR audio (4)
manpages for more information.
.P
You can use a path like
.B /usr/local/games/zcode:$HOME/zcode
with
.B $ZCODE_PATH
or
.B $INFOCOM_PATH
because the shell will digest that
.B $HOME
variable for you before setting
.BR $ZCODE_PATH .
While processing
.B frotz.conf
and
.BR $HOME/.frotzrc ,
a shell is not used. Therefore you cannot use
environmental variables in the
.B zcodepath
option within the config files.
.P
This manpage is not intended to tell users HOW to play interactive
fiction.  Refer to the file HOW_TO_PLAY included in the Unix Frotz
documentation or visit one of the following sites:
.IP
http://www.microheaven.com/ifguide/
.br
http://www.brasslantern.org/beginners/
.br
http://www.musicwords.net/if/how_to_play.htm
.br
http://ifarchive.org/

.SH BUGS
This program has no bugs.  no bugs.  no bugs.  no *WHAP* thank you.  If
you find one, please report it to the Gitlab site referenced above in
.B FURTHER
.BR INFORMATION .

.SH AUTHORS
.B Frotz
was written by Stefan Jokisch for MSDOS in 1995-7.
.br
The Unix port was done by Galen Hazelwood.
.br
The Unix port is currently maintained by David Griffith <dave@661.org>.

.SH CONTRIBUTORS
In 2019, a Kickstarter campaign was run to raise funds to pay Mark
McCurry to overhaul the audio subsystem for the curses port of
.B Frotz.
The following people contributed $100 towards that effort:
.br
Simon Martin
.br
Dan Sanderson
.br
Justin de Vesine
.br
Daniel Sharpe

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sfrotz (6),
.BR dfrotz (6),
.BR nitfol (6),
.BR rezrov (6),
.BR jzip (6),
.BR xzip (6),
.BR inform (1)
