.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH SFROTZ 6 2.53
.SH NAME
sfrotz \- interpreter for Infocom and other Z-Machine games (SDL interface)


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sfrotz
.RI [ options "] " "file " [ blorb_file "]"

At least one file must be specified on the command line.  This can be
either a plain Z-code file or a Blorb file.  A Z-code file is a compiled
executable for the Z-Machine.  A Blorb file contains audio, graphics,
and other things in addition to the game wrapped up into a single file.
It can also optionally contain the Z-Machine executable.  If a plain
Z-code file is supplied, then
.B Frotz
will check for a Blorb file with the same base name but an extension of
.B .blb,
.B .blorb,
or
.B .zblorb
and load it if found.

If the file supplied on the command line is a Blorb file, then
.B Frotz
will check to see if a Z-code file is contained within.  If not found, then
.B Frotz
will complain and exit.

An alternatively-named Blorb file can be supplied as the optional second
parameter to the command line invocatio


.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Frotz
is a Z-Machine interpreter.  The Z-machine is a virtual machine designed
by Infocom to run all of their text adventures.  It went through multiple
revisions during the lifetime of the company, and two further revisions
(V7 and V8) were created by Graham Nelson after the company's demise.
The specification is now quite well documented; this version of
.B Frotz
supports version 1.0.
.P
This version of
.B Frotz
fully supports all these versions of the Z-Machine including the
graphical version 6.  Graphics and sound are created through the use of
the SDL libraries.  AIFF sound effects and music in MOD and OGG formats
are supported when packaged in Blorb container files or optionally from
individual files.


.SH STANDARD OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Watch attribute setting.  Setting and clearing of attributes on objects
will be noted in debugging messages.

.TP
.B \-A
Watch attribute testing.  Every time the Z-machine tests an attribute
value, the test and the result will be reported.

.TP
.B \-b <colorname>
Sets the default background color.  <colorname> corresponds to one of the
Z-machine colors, which are as follows:
.br
.I black red green yellow blue magenta cyan white
.br
If color support is disabled or not available on your terminal, this
option does nothing.

.TP
.B \-c N
Sets the number of context lines used.  By default, after a ``[MORE]''
prompt, and assuming there is enough output pending,
.B Frotz
will allow all the currently visible lines to scroll off the screen
before prompting again.  This switch specifies how many lines of text
.B Frotz
will hold over and display at the top of the next screen.

.TP
.B \-d
Disable color.

.TP
.B \-f <colorname>
Sets the default foreground color.  <colorname> corresponds to one of the
Z-machine colors, which are as follows
.br
.I black red green yellow blue magenta cyan white
.br
If color support is disabled or is not available on your terminal, this
option does nothing.

.TP
.B \-h N
Manually sets the text height.

.TP
.B \-i
Ignore fatal errors.  If a Z-Machine interpreter encounters a zcode error
such as division-by-zero or addressing an illegal object, the proper
response is to abort execution.  This is done because the zcode program
doesn't have a clear idea of what is going on.  There are some games out
there that cause fatal errors because the authors were careless and used
an interpreter that didn't properly check for errors.  This option is
intended to get around such bugs, but be warned that Strange Things may
happen if fatal errors are not caught.

.TP
.B \-I N
Set the interpreter number.  Infocom designed the Z-machine such that a
game could tell on what kind of machine the interpreter was running.
See INTERPRETER NUMBER below.

.TP
.B \-l N
Sets the left margin, for those who might have specific formatting needs.

.TP
.B \-L <filename>
When the game starts, load this saved game file.

.TP
.B \-o
Watch object movement.  This option enables debugging messages from the
interpreter which describe the moving of objects in the object tree.

.TP
.B \-O
Watch object location.  These debugging messages detail the locations of
objects in the object tree.

.TP
.B \-P
Alter the piracy opcode.  The piracy opcode was never used by Infocom.
This switch is really only useful for those who like to toy around with
Z-code.

.TP
.B \-r N
Sets the right margin.


.TP
.B \-s N
Set the random number seed value.  The given seed value is used as the initial
seed value on every restart. This is helpful for testing games like
.B Curses
which make random decisions before the first input (such that the hot
key Alt\-S does not really help).

.TP
.B \-S N
Set the transcript width.  By default your transcript files are formatted
to a width of 80 columns per line, regardless of the current text width.
This switch allows you to change this setting. In particular, use \-S 0
to deactivate automatic line splitting in transcript files.

.TP
.B \-t
Sets the Z-machine's
.I Tandy bit,
which may affect the behavior of certain Infocom games.  For example,
Zork I pretends not to have sequels, and Witness has its language
toned down.

.TP
.B \-u N
Sets the number of slots available for
.B Frotz's
multiple undo hotkey (see below).  This defaults to twenty, which should
be sufficient for most purposes.  Setting too high a number here may be
dangerous on machines with limited memory.

.TP
.B \-w N
Manually sets the text width.

.TP
.B \-x
Expand the abbreviations "g", "x", and "z" to "again", "examine", and
"wait".  This switch is for use with old Infocom games that lack these
common abbreviations which were introduced in later games.  Use it with
caution: A few games might use "g", "x" or "z" for different purposes.

.TP
.B \-Z N
Error checking mode.
.br
0 = don't report errors.
.br
1 = report first instance of an error.
.br
2 = report all errors.
.br
3 = exit after any error.
.br
Default is 1 (report first instance of an error).

.SH EXTENDED OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-@ <listfile>
Use resource files listed in <listfile> (see NON BLORB RESOURCES).

.TP
.B \-%
Use local resource files.

.TP
.B \-F
Run in fullscreen mode (see NOTES).

.TP
.B \-m <msecs>
Set the timer interrupt cycle to <msecs> milliseconds, instead of the
default 100 (1/10 sec).

.TP
.B \-N <mode>
Set the mode (date or name) for creating default file names for
save/script etc.  For
.IR date ,
a timestamp is prepended to the filename extension.  For
.IR name ,
a four-digit number beginning with
.I 0000
is prepended to the filename extension.

.TP
.B \-T
Use traditional in-game requests for file names, intead of on-screen dialogs.

.B \-v
Show version information and exit.  This will display the version of
Frotz, some information about what's enabled and what's not, the commit
date of the source code, and a git(1) hash of that commit.

.TP
.B \-V
Force the use of default monospaced VGA font.


.SH HOT KEYS
.B Sfrotz
supports the same hot keys as standard
.B Frotz,
plus the Ctl-Alt-X combination for immediate exit, which may be used in
case of emergency. Note that these hot keys are enabled only when the
Z-machine is waiting for line input (for Z-machine experts: @read
opcode), with the exception of Ctl-Alt-X which also works in single
character input mode (@read_char opcode).

.TP
.B Alt-D
Set debugging options.

.TP
.B Alt-H
Help (print the list of hot keys).

.TP
.B Alt-N
New game (restart).

.TP
.B Alt-P
Playback on.

.TP
.B Alt-R
Recording on/off.

.TP
.B Alt-S
Set random number seed.

.TP
.B Alt-U
Undo one turn.

.TP
.B Alt-X
Exit game (after confirmation).

.TP
.B Ctl-Alt-X
Exit game immediately (no confirmation).


.SH WINDOW
.B Sfrotz
has a hardwired default screen size of 640x400. The screen size can be
changed by the values in this section, by the values found in the Reso
chunck of a Blorb file, and finally by the -w and -h command line
options (in that order). Note however that
.B Sfrotz
shall refuse to set a screen width less than 640 and/or a height less
than 400. NOTE: for normal (windowed) usage, the screen size should
obviously be less than the PC screen resolution (taking into account
also window decorations, taskbars etc.) For fullscreen usage, the size
should preferably be one of those supported by the PC video driver;
otherwise, SDL shall try to use the next higher available resolution,
with black borders around the Z-machine screen. In fullscreen mode,
however, it may happen that for some strange resolutions SDL accepts the
request, but the screen goes blank... In such a case, you may shut down
the program by pressing Ctrl-Alt-X.


.SH INTERPRETER NUMBER
The interpreter number is a setting in the Z-machine header which is
used to tell the game on what sort of machine the interpreter is
running.
.B Sfrotz
will automatically choose the most appropriate number for a given
Infocom-produced game.  Should you want to override the number, the
.B \-I
option is available.

An interpreter should choose the interpreter number most suitable for
the machine it will run on.  In Versions up to 5, the main consideration
is that the behaviour of 'Beyond Zork' depends on the interpreter
number (in terms of its usage of the character graphics font). In
Version 6, the decision is more serious, as existing Infocom story files
depend on interpreter number in many ways: moreover, some story files
expect to be run only on the interpreters for a particular machine.
There are, for instance, specifically Amiga versions.  The DECSystem-20
was Infocom's own in-house mainframe.

For Infocom's four V6 games, the interpreter number will be
automatically chosen based on the title and release number.  Of course,
this can be overridden at the command line.

Infocom used the following interpreter numbers:

.PP
.BR 1
.BR \ \ DECSystem\ 20

.PP
.BR 2
.BR \ \ Apple\ IIe

.PP
.BR 3
.BR \ \ Macintosh

.PP
.BR 4
.BR \ \ Amiga

.PP
.BR 5
.BR \ \ Atari\ ST

.PP
.BR 6
.BR \ \ IBM\ PC

.PP
.BR 7
.BR \ \ Commodore 128

.PP
.BR 8
.BR \ \ Commodore 64

.PP
.BR 9
.BR \ \ Apple\ IIc

.PP
.BR 10
.BR \ \ Apple\ IIgs

.PP
.BR 11
.BR \ \ Tandy\ Color


.SH NON BLORB RESOURCES
Besides Blorb-packaged resources,
.B Sfrotz
can also render graphics and sound from individual files, provided the
latter are either suitably named (e.g a common root with a numeric field
specifying the resource number), or listed in a suitably formatted text
file.

Note that this feature is not automatic, but must be enabled by the -%
or -@ command line options. When the feature is enabled, resources found
this way override those in the Blorb file, if present.

This feature can be useful to game designers, as it eases changing and
adding resources without having to re-compile the Blorb file each time.
The format of the list file used with the -@ option (see EXAMPLE BLC
FILE) is identical to that of the BLC control file used by L. Ross
Raszewski's iblorb package, so one can use the same list for compiling
the final Blorb file for distribution.


.SH TRUETYPE FONTS

.B Sfrotz
can display text with Truetype or Type1 fonts, using the FreeType2
rendering library. The location of the necessary font files must be
specified in the setup file. Also, antialiased rendering of Truetype
fonts can be specified. Please note that this feature in
.B sfrotz
is still
.B experimental,
so don't expect too much (e.g., kerning is not supported).


.SH DEFAULT FONTS
.B Sfrotz
does not need Truetype fonts to work; in fact it has a default
monospaced font, based on an 8x16 VGA font, which can be used for both
the TEXT_FONT and the FIXED_FONT of the z-machine, with suitable (though
not very nice) modifications for the various styles. Even if Truetype
fonts are specified in the setup file,
.B Sfrotz
can be forced to use the VGA font by the -V command line switch.


.SH UNICODE
.B Sfrotz
supports Unicode glyphs by way of UTF-8 as long as the fonts loaded
contain the glyphs you need.  The default font provided by SDL does not
contain much beyond the Latin alphabet and some diacritical marks.
Inverted punctuation marks as used in Spanish are missing.  Two
monospaced fonts known to work well with most commonly-encountered
alphabetic languages are Leggie and FreeMono. They can be found at
https://memleek.org/leggie/ (X11 BDF fonts) and
https://www.gnu.org/software/freefont/ (Truetype fonts). Logographic
glyphs (Kanji and Chinese are not currently supported.


.SH ENVIRONMENT
If the ZCODE_PATH environmental variable is defined,
.B Sfrotz
will search that path for game files.  If that doesn't exist,
INFOCOM_PATH will be searched.


.SH SETUP FILE
On startup,
.B sfrotz
will check $HOME/.sfrotzrc for setup information.  The setup file has
four sections: Interpreter, Display, Fonts, and Resources.

The
.B Interpreter
section deals with options having to do with how the
.B Frotz
core works.

The
.B Window
section deals with screen display.
.B Sfrotz
has a hardwired default screen size of 640x400. The screen size can be
changed by the values in this section, by the values found in the Reso
chunck of a Blorb file, and finally by the -w and -h command line
options (in that order).  Note however that
.B sfrotz
shall refuse to set a screen width less than 640 and/or a height less
than 400.

.BR NOTE :
for normal (windowed) usage, the screen size should obviously be less
than the PC screen resolution (taking into account also window
decorations, taskbars etc.) For fullscreen usage, the size should
preferably be one of those supported by the PC video driver; otherwise,
SDL shall try to use the next higher available resolution, with black
borders around the z-machine screen. In fullscreen mode, however, it may
happen that for some strange resolutions SDL accepts the request, but
the screen goes blank... In such a case, you may shut down the program
by pressing Ctrl-Alt-X.

The
.B Display
section is reserved for future developments.

The
.B Fonts
section is for defining the font directory, font files, and if
antialiasing is enabled (which is currently not supported).

The following eight statements: textroman, textbold, textitalic,
textbolditalic, fixedroman, fixedbold, fixeditalic, and fixedbolditalic;
specify the eight font faces used by the z-machine (not counting the
so-called graphics font used in Beyond Zork, which is hardwired in the
program), that is the normal TEXT_FONT and the monospaced FIXED_FONT,
each in four styles (roman, bold, italic and bold+italic). A single face
is specified by the file name (with its suffix!), optionally followed by
an @ sign and a number, indicating the font size in pixels (default is
14). Multiple face files can be specified, separated by pipe (|)
characters;
.B Sfrotz
shall use the first one it finds (see the example in EXAMPLE SETUP
FILE). This feature allows e.g. to use the same setup file on different
systems.

The
.B Resources
section is for configuring graphics and sound resources.  Each template
must contain exactly one C-style decimal format specifier (e.g. Pict%d)
to be substituted by the resource number.


.SH SETUP FILE GRAMMAR
.B [Interpreter]
.HP 2
Number =
.I number
.br
Set the interpreter number (default is 4, i.e. Amiga Interpreter)

.HP 2
Error Reporting =
.I level
.br
Set the error reporting level (same as the -Z option)

.HP 2
Ignore Errors =
.I 0/1
.br
Ignore (1) or not (0) non-fatal runtime errors.

.HP 2
Expand Abbreviations =
.I 0/1
.br
Set/reset expansion of g/x/z abbreviations. Expansion is useful for old
v1 games which do not understand such abbreviations. Default: 0 (the
-xoption can set this switch.)

.HP 2
Tandy Bit =
.I 0/1
.br
Set/reset the Tandy bit. Default: 0 (the -t option can set this switch.)

.HP 2
Wrap Script Lines =
.I nc
.br
Set the width (number of columns) of the transcript to nc. Same as -S option.

.HP 2
SaveNames =
.I date/name
.br
Set the mode (date or name) for creating default file names for
save/script etc.  For
.IR date ,
a timestamp is prepended to the filename extension.  For
.IR name ,
a four-digit number beginning with
.I 0000
is prepended to the filename extension.

.P
.B [Window]
.HP 2
AcWidth =
.I width
.br
Set the screen width in pixels (default: 640)

.HP 2
AcHeight =
.I height
.br
Set the screen height in pixels (default: 400)

.P
.B [Display]
.HP 2
(This section reserved for future developments)

.P
.B [Fonts]
.HP 2
antialias =
.I 0/1
.br
Set antialiased rendering of Truetype fonts off (0) or on (nonzero).
Note that this option cannot be overridden by a command line switch.

.HP 2
fontdir =
.I folder
.br
Specify the directory containing the Truetype fonts.  If this does not
begin with a slash, then the directory is assumed to be relative to the
user's home directory.

.HP 2
textroman =
.I fontspec
.br
Set the font file for TEXT_FONT, roman style.

.HP 2
textbold =
.I fontspec
.br
Set the font file for TEXT_FONT, bold style.

.HP 2
textitalic =
.I fontspec
.br
Set the font file for TEXT_FONT, italic style.

.HP 2
textbolditalic =
.I fontspec
.br Set the font file for TEXT_FONT, bold and italic style.

.HP 2
fixedroman =
.I fontspec
.br
Set the font file for FIXED_FONT, roman style.

.HP 2
fixedbold =
.I fontspec
.br
Set the font file for FIXED_FONT, bold style.

.HP 2
fixeditalic =
.I fontspec
.br
Set the font file for FIXED_FONT, italic style.

.HP 2
fixedbolditalic =
.I fontspec
.br
Set the font file for FIXED_FONT, bold and italic style

.P
.B [Resources]

.HP 2
Dir =
.I folder
.br
Specify the folder for individual graphics/sound resource files.

.HP 2
Pict =
.I template
.br
Template for picture resource files.

.HP 2
Snd =
.I template
.br
Template for sound resource files.


.SH EXAMPLE SETUP FILE

# The # denotes the start of a comment
.br
# Everything after the # is ignored, up to the end of the line

[Interpreter]
.br
SaveNames=date

[Window]
.br
# The following entries are commented out
.br
# but they are the same as the hardwired defaults, anyway
.br
#AcWidth = 640
.br
#AcHeight = 400

[Display]

[Fonts]
.br
antialias=1
.br
fontdir=/usr/share/fonts/truetype/freefont
.br
textroman=arial.ttf@16|FreeSans.ttf@16
.br
textbold=arialbd.ttf@16|FreeSansBold.ttf@16
.br
textitalic=ariali.ttf@16|FreeSansOblique.ttf@16
.br
textbolditalic=arialbi.ttf@16|FreeSansBoldOblique.ttf@16
.br
fixedroman=cour.ttf@16|FreeMono.ttf@16
.br
fixedbold=courbd.ttf@16|FreeMonoBold.ttf@16
.br
fixeditalic=couri.ttf@16|FreeMonoOblique.ttf@16
.br
fixedbolditalic=courbi.ttf@16|FreeMonoBoldOblique.ttf@16

[Resources]
.br
Dir=./        # the current dir
.br
Pict=PIC%d    # i.e. PIC1, PIC2, ...
.br
Snd=SND%d     # i.e. SND3, SND4, ...


.SH EXAMPLE BLC FILE
Exec 0 ZCOD ani.z6

Snd 13 FORM busyalone.au.aiff
.br
Snd 12 FORM s0020.au.aiff
.br
Snd 11 FORM s0154.au.aiff
.br
Snd 10 FORM s1484.au.aiff

Pict 10 PNG edleft.png0.png
.br
Pict 11 PNG edleft.png1.png
.br
Pict 12 PNG edleft.png2.png
.br
Pict 13 PNG edleft.png3.png
.br
Pict 14 PNG edleft.png4.png
.br
Pict 15 PNG edleft.png5.png

Pict 16 PNG lauhoh.png0.png
.br
Pict 17 PNG lauhoh.png1.png
.br
Pict 18 PNG lauhoh.png2.png

Pict 19 PNG edfront.png0.png
.br
Pict 20 PNG edfront.png1.png
.br
Pict 21 PNG edfront.png2.png
.br
Pict 22 PNG edfront.png3.png
.br
Pict 23 PNG edfront.png4.png
.br
Pict 24 PNG edfront.png5.png

Pict 25 PNG hoagie.png0.png
.br
Pict 26 PNG hoagie.png1.png

Pict 30 PNG dott0.png


.SH FURTHER INFORMATION
.PP
The
.B Frotz
homepage is at https://661.org/proj/if/frotz/.
.PP
A
.BR git(1)
repository of all versions of Unix Frotz back to 2.32 is available
for public perusal here:
.br
https://gitlab.com/DavidGriffith/frotz/.
.PP
The bleeding edge of
.B Frotz
development may be followed there.
.PP
The Interactive Fiction Archive is a good place to find games to play
with
.B Frotz.
Various ports and builds for Frotz may also be found here.  Here is its URL:
.br
http://www.ifarchive.org/
.PP
Most distributions of Linux and BSD include
.B Frotz
in their package repositories.
.br
It is distributed under the GNU General Public License version 2 or (at
your option) any later version.
.br
.BR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html
.br
This software is offered as-is with no warranty or liability.  If you
find a bug or would like
.B Frotz
to do something it doesn't currently do, please visit the above Gitlab
website and report your concerns.


.SH CAVEATS
.PP
The Z Machine itself has trouble with the concept of resizing a terminal.
It assumes that once the screen height and width are set, they will never
change; even across saves.  This made sense when 24x80 terminals were the
norm and graphical user interfaces were mostly unknown.  I'm fairly sure
there's a way around this problem, but for now, don't resize an xterm in
which
.B frotz
is running.  Also, you should try to make sure the terminal on which you
restore a saved game has the same dimensions as the one on which you
saved the game.

.PP
Audio latency might be unreasonably long depending on the settings of
your operating system.  Linux generally has things right.  The BSDs may
need some sysctl(8) settings adjusted.  See the sound(4) or audio(4)
manpages for more information.

.PP
This manpage is not intended to tell users HOW to play interactive
fiction.  Refer to the file HOW_TO_PLAY included in the Unix Frotz
documentation or visit one of the following sites:
.br
http://www.microheaven.com/ifguide/
.br
http://www.brasslantern.org/beginners/
.br
http://www.musicwords.net/if/how_to_play.htm
.br
http://ifarchive.org/


.SH BUGS
This program has no bugs.  no bugs.  no bugs.  no *WHAP* thank you.  If
you find one, please report it to the Gitlab site referenced above in
.B
FURTHER INFORMATION.


.SH AUTHORS
.B frotz
was written by Stefan Jokisch for MSDOS in 1995-7.
.br
The SDL port was done in 2009 by Aldo Cumani and is currently maintained by
David Griffith <dave@661.org>.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR frotz (6)
.BR dfrotz (6)
.BR nitfol (6)
.BR rezrov (6)
.BR jzip (6)
.BR xzip (6)
.BR inform (1)
