.TH XFROTZ "6" "2021-06-21" "X11 Frotz v2.54"
.SH NAME
xfrotz \- interpreter for Infocom and other Z-Machine games (X11 interface)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xfrotz
.I "[options] file"

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIxfrotz\fP program is an Xlib-based interpreter for Z-machine
code, the byte code used by Infocom games and, more recently, Inform.
.I xfrotz
supports versions 1 through 8 of the format.  It uses the standard
Quetzal format for its saved games.

.I Xfrotz
supports Version 6 graphical games.  It currently supports
color, graphics (in the
.B .mg1
format only) by way of Blorb archives or by parsing Infocom's original
files.  Sound is supported through OSS.


.SH OPTIONS
In each of the following options which enables some feature, replacing
.B \-
with
.B \+
explicitly disables that feature, overriding any X resources.  Also,
each option has a corresponding X resource, which is listed in
parentheses after the option name.
.TP
.B \-aa
(class \fBWatchAttribute\fP, name \fBwatchAttrAssign\fP)
Enables watching of attribute assignment.
.TP
.B \-at
(class \fBWatchAttribute\fP, name \fBwatchAttrTest\fP)
Enables watching of attribute testing.
.TP
.B \-bg <color>
(class \fBBackground\fP, name \fBbackground\fP)
Sets the default background color.  In addition to the standard X
color specification formats,
.I xfrotz
supports the format \fBz:\fP\fInum\fP, which refers to a z-machine
color from 2 to 9.
.TP
.B \-c <number>
(class \fBContextLines\fP, name \fBcontextLines\fP)
Specifies the number of context lines used.  When scrolling large
amounts of text,
.I xfrotz
pauses after each screenful with a ``[MORE]'' prompt; this option
specifies how many lines of a previous screen
.I xfrotz
will keep at the top of the next screen.
.TP
.B \-fg <color>
(class \fBForeground\fP, name \fBforeground\fP)
Sets the default foreground color.  See \fB\-bg\fP above.
.TP
.B \-fn[\-z|[f][b][i]] <font name>
(class \fBFont\fP, name \fBfont[Z|[F][B][I]]\fP)
Sets the fonts to be used for various styles.  For example,
\fB\-fn\-fbi\fP sets the font for fixed, bold, italic text, and
\fB\-fn\-z\fP sets the z-machine ``picture font,'' which is used in
\fIBeyond Zork\fP and \fIJourney\fP.
.TP
.B \-i
(class \fBIgnoreErrors\fP, name \fBignoreErrors\fP)
Ignore runtime errors.  This can be useful when running
.I xfrotz
with buggy story files which cause fatal errors.
.TP
.B \-lm <number>
(class \fBMargin\fP, name \fBleftMargin\fP)
Sets the left margin.
.TP
.B \-L <filename>
(class \fBLoadThis\fP, name \fBloadthis\fP)
When the game starts, load this saved game file.
.TP
.B \-ol
(class \fBWatchObject\fP, name \fBwatchObjLocating\fP)
Enables watching of testing the location of objects.
.TP
.B \-om
(class \fBWatchObject\fP, name \fBWatchObjMovement\fP)
Enables watching of object movement.
.TP
.B \-p
(class \fBPiracy\fP, name \fBpiracy\fP)
Enable branching on the
.I @piracy
opcode.  This opcode is seldom used.
.TP
.B \-R <path>
(class \fBRestricted\fP, name \fBrestricted\fP)
Restricted read/write.  Reading and writing files will be restricted
only to the provided path. Ordinarily xfrotz will write or read its
saves, transcripts, and move recordings in whatever path or directory
the user provides when the
.B SAVE,
.B SCRIPT,
or
.B RECORDING
commands are given.  This can be undesirable if xfrotz is run in a
restricted environment, by a front end, or by a chatbot.  This option will
cause xfrotz to write or read only to the provided path and nowhere else.
Then the controlling process can then watch that directory for changes
and need not worry about someone scribbling or snooping who-knows-where.
.TP
.B \-rm <number>
(class \fBMargin\fP, name \fBrightMargin\fP)
Sets the right margin.
.TP
.B \-rs <number>
(class \fBRandomSeed\fP, name \fBrandomSeed\fP)
Set the random seed.  By default, the random number generator is
initialized based on the system clock; this allows you to make the
random number generator predictable, for use in recorded scripts or
debugging.
.TP
.B \-sc <number>
(class \fBScriptColumns\fP, name \fBscriptColumns\fP)
Set the transcript width (default 80).  Set to 0 to disable line
splitting in transcripts.
.TP
.B \-t
(class \fBTandy\fP, name \fBtandy\fP)
Set the z-machine's Tandy bit, which affects the behavior of certain
Infocom games.  For example, \fIZork I\fP pretends not to have
sequels, and \fIWitness\fP has its language censored.
.TP
.B \-u <number>
(class \fBUndoSlots\fP, name \fBundoSlots\fP)
Set the number of undo slots available.  The default number is 25.
Note that many Infocom games do not support an ``undo'' command, and
most Inform games do not allow more than one ``undo'' at a time.
Because of this, you may need to use the undo hotkey instead (see
below).
.TP
.B \-x
(class \fBExpandAbbrevs\fP, name \fBexpandAbbrevs\fP)
With this option enabled,
.I xfrotz
expands ``x'' to ``examine,'' ``o'' to ``oops,'' and ``g'' to
``again.''  This is convenient when running certain Infocom games
which do not implement these abbreviations.
.TP
.B \-xrm <resources>
This allows setting resources on the command line.
.TP
.B \-zs <level>
(class \fBZStrict\fP, name \fBzStrict\fP)
Set the reporting level of ``Vile Zero Error From Hell'' bugs.  The
possible levels are: 0 to print no error messages, 1 to print just one
error message and ignore subsequent errors (the default), 2 to print
all error messages, or 3 to exit with a fatal error.  Symbolic values
of \fBnever\fP, \fBonce\fP, \fBalways\fP, and \fBfatal\fP,
respectively, are also accepted.
.SH RESOURCES
\fIxfrotz\fP's resource class is ``XFrotz'', and its resource name is
the base name by which it was invoked, usually ``xfrotz''.  In
addition to the X resources listed above, there is one more set of
resources: by setting \fBcolor\fP\fInum\fP (class name
\fBColor\fP\fInum\fP) to the name of a color, you can change the
meaning of the z-machine colors.  Note that here the \fBz:\fP\fBnum\fP
syntax is not accepted.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.I xfrotz
supports the INFOCOM_PATH environment variable.  This is a
colon-separated list of pathnames in which
.I xfrotz
will search for the given story file.  Note that
.I xfrotz
will expect the
.I story.mg1
file and the
.I sounds
directory to be in the same directory as it finds the story file.
.SH HOTKEYS
.I xfrotz
supports several ``hotkeys,'' which interrupt the currently running
game to set options or perform certain actions.
.TP
.B Mod1\+D
Sets debugging options by prompting the user.  These options are
equivalent to specifying \fB\-aa\fP, \fB\-at\fP, \fB\-ol\fP, and
\fB\-om\fP on the command line.
.TP
.B Mod1\+H
Lists available hotkeys.
.TP
.B Mod1\+N
Starts a new game.  Equivalent to the \fIrestart\fP command supported
by most games.
.TP
.B Mod1\+P
Starts or stops playback from a recorded script.
.TP
.B Mod1\+R
Starts or stops recording player input into a file.
.TP
.B Mod1\+S
Sets the random number generator seed.
.TP
.B Mod1\+U
Undoes one turn.
.TP
.B Mod1\+X
Exits the currently running game.


.SH FURTHER INFORMATION
.PP
The
.B Frotz
homepage is at https://661.org/proj/if/frotz/.
.PP
The bleeding edge of Frotz development may be followed there.
.PP
The Interactive Fiction Archive is a good place to find games to play
with Frotz.  Various ports and builds for Frotz may also be found here.
Here is its URL:
.br
http://www.ifarchive.org/
.PP
Most distributions of Linux and BSD include
.B Frotz
in their package repositories.
.PP
It is distributed under the GNU General Public License version 2 or (at
your option) any later version.
.br
.BR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html
.PP
This software is offered as-is with no warranty or liability.  If you
find a bug or would like
.B Frotz
to do something it doesn't currently do, please visit the above Gitlab
website and report your concerns.


.SH CAVEATS
.PP
This manpage is not intended to tell users HOW to play interactive
fiction.  Refer to the file HOW_TO_PLAY included in the Unix Frotz
documentation or visit one of the following sites:
.br
http://www.microheaven.com/ifguide/
.br
http://www.brasslantern.org/beginners/
.br
http://www.musicwords.net/if/how_to_play.htm
.br
http://ifarchive.org/


.SH BUGS
If run on an 8-bit display,
.I xfrotz
will most likely leak the entire color palette, especially if
displaying graphics.

The window size is fixed at 800x600, with pictures scaled to match;
this scaling is hard coded.  Also,
.I xfrotz
depends on backing store instead of saving the screen's state.

If different fonts have different heights, the display might look a
bit strange, and things might not line up as they should.  This is
especially apparent in menus.

In order to change the fonts used, you would usually have to specify
at least 4 fonts (for normal, bold, italic, and bold italic).  This is
extremely cumbersome.


.SH AUTHORS
.I frotz
was written by Stefan Jokisch in 1995-7.
.I xfrotz
is an Xlib port written by Daniel Schepler, based in part on the Unix
port by Galen Hazelwood and on WinFrotz by Rich Lawrence.
.br
The Unix port is currently maintained by David Griffith <dave@661.org>

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR frotz (6)
.BR sfrotz (6)
.BR nitfol (6)
.BR rezrov (6)
.BR jzip (6)
.BR xzip (6)
.BR inform (1)

